---
layout:     post
title:      "30 days ago I went to Prague"
subtitle:   ""
date:       2016-06-01 08:00:00
author:     "Brian Exelbierd"
header-img: "img/2016/IndianVisa.jpg"
published:  true
category: Travel
tags:
 - Visas
redirect-from:
 - /2016/06/01/30-days-ago/
---

**30 days ago I went to Prague**

I went to apply for a visa. It should take one-week to complete.
They tried to convince me that I had to apply in the US. I pointed
out that I don't live there anymore. After some back and forth they
took the application, just like they always do.

**23 days ago I went to Prague**

I went to pick my visa up. I was told it wasn't ready. They decided
they needed an address for me in the US even though I don't live
there. Despite having multiple contact methods for me, they waited
until I was there in person to tell me. I had to go on a trip so
I took my passport back. I said I'd return in 20+ days. They said
the visa should be ready, printed, and just need to be affixed to
my passport.

**Today I went to Prague**

I went to pick up my visa. Initially they told me I'd need to leave
my passport and come back tomorrow. I told them I lived in Brno and
asked if they could do it today, as promised. They said it wasn't
possible to issue the visa until at least 4 or 5 pm. It was 10 am.
I said I'd wait.

**Today I sat in Prague**

At 12:15 pm they asked if I'd been told the visa wouldn't be ready
until 4. I smelled doubt.  I said yes, but that I was from Brno so
I had nowhere else to go. I said I'd wait. They looked nervous.

**Today I was passive-aggressive in Prague**

They knew I would sit there. They knew there was no reason not to
issue the visa. They were scared. At 12:45 they issued the visa.
