---
layout:     post
title:      "Dealing with the Time Change"
subtitle:   "A Project Proposal"
date:       2016-03-21 08:00:00
author:     "Brian Exelbierd"
header-img: "img/2016/Clock-Digital-800px.png"
published:  true
category: Ramblings
tags:
 - Time
---

The inability of the world to decide on uniform time changes
creates one 2-week and one 1-week pocket of time where all standing
meetings should be canceled and we should instead work on a single task,
focused and uninterrupted.
{:.quote}

Every year for 3 weeks a bunch of calls and meetings I am involved in
get messed up.  Everyone panics and no longer knows what time it is.
This is caused by the clocks "freaking" out.[^0]

As most folks know, the vast majority of the world that observes a
Seasonal Time Change, changes their clocks on the last Sunday in March
and on the last Sunday in October.  The USA, of course, ignores this[^1],
and observes the time change on the second Sunday in March and the
first Sunday in November.  A bunch of other countries never mess with
their clocks.

This is never going to go away.  Even if, and it is a huge *if* the US
could be made to change its dates[^1], there is no way non-changing
countries are all going to agree to change. Time, like many things,
is political.

This confusion creates opportunity.  Specifically, the inability of
the world to decide on uniform time changes creates one 2-week and one
1-week pocket of time where all standing meetings should be canceled
and we should instead work on a single task, focused and uninterrupted.

These pockets are like those times in College before exams or during the
semester breaks when we were allowed to stop and focus.  Sometimes that
meant reviewing Chemistry over and over again.  Sometimes it meant taking
an extra credit course in a Winter or Summer session.  Sometimes it maeant
learning to knit or putting on a play or otherwise pushing ourselves
outside of our study area.  And sometimes it meant stopping and relaxing.
In all cases it generally meant good mental-health and growth.

This may not be original, but if enough of us say it, we can make
it happen.

Photo Credit: [Schplook](https://openclipart.org/detail/190975/digital-clock)
{:.footnotes}

[^0]: Please ignore the fact that the clock freakout is a regularly scheduled and widely known event. See [xkcd](http://xkcd.com/1391/)

[^1]: Freedom
